# Week 2

**Topics covered this week:** [Biological Computing in Python I](https://mhasoba.github.io/TheMulQuaBio/notebooks/05-Python_I.html#) (variables, loops, comprehensions, functions, scope, writing programs, unit testing and debugging)

Languages: Python3

Project structure: 22 python script files in code directory, some of which will manipulate files from data directory. Data directory contains 3 files; more will be generated by running the code files as below. Results directory will also be populated by running code files as described below. The sandbox directory contains test.txt which is used by basic_io1.py, and basic_io3.py outputs to sandbox (described below).

## Code Files:

* [**loops.py**](code/loops.py)
  * Script file exploring python for and while loops (careful: an infinite loop is generated! Escape using ctrl+c).

* [**MyExampleScript.py**](code/MyExampleScript.py)
  * A simple script containing one function to calculate the square of a number.

* [**cfexercises1.py**](code/cfexercises1.py)
  * A modular program containing functions which perform various basic mathematical manipulations, e.g. calculating a factorial.

* [**cfexercises2.py**](code/cfexercises2.py)
  * Some examples of loops and conditionals in functions; hello!

* [**oaks.py**](code/oaks.py)
  * Exploring loops and comprehensions whilst determining whether trees are oaks.

* [**scope.py**](code/scope.py)
  * A script split into 5 sections which explore variable scope, and global and local variables.

* [**basic_io1.py**](code/basic_io1.py)
  * Script that opens test.txt in ../sandbox and prints the lines; first as they appear and then with blank lines removed.

* [**basic_io2.py**](code/basic_io2.py)
  * Writes file called testout.txt into ../sandbox which contains the numbers 0 to 99.

* [**basic_io3.py**](code/basic_io3.py)
  * Writes the binary file testp.p to ../sandbox containing the contents of a dictionary, then reads this binary file and prints its contents.

* [**basic_csv.py**](code/basic_csv.py)
  * Reads testcsv.csv from the data directory which contains information about several species; prints this information; and writes a new csv file, bodymass.csv, to ../data containing only species name and body mass.

* [**boilerplate.py**](code/boilerplate.py)
  * Template python program.

* [**using_name.py**](code/using_name.py)
  * Exploring the special __ name __ variable: in the ipython3 console try running the script using %run using_name.py, and try import using_name.

* [**sysargv.py**](code/sysargv.py)
  * Script exploring sys.argv: try running the script with different arguments.

* [**control_flow.py**](code/control_flow.py)
  * Modular script to demonstrate control flows; contains various functions which perform mathematical calculations.

* [**test_control_flow.py**](code/test_control_flow.py)
  * Contains function for determining whether a number is even or odd; unit testing has been implemented using `doctest`.

* [**debugme.py**](code/debugme.py)
  * Script which originally produced `ZeroDivisionError`; explore `ipdb.set_trace()` for debugging; implement exceptions to catch errors.

* [**lc1.py**](code/lc1.py)
  * Using loops and list comprehensions to extract information about birds from tuples to create lists.

* [**lc2.py**](code/lc2.py)
  * Using loops and list comprehensions to create lists of tuples containing monthly rainfall data.

* [**dictionary.py**](code/dictionary.py)
  * Short script which populates a dictionary from a list of tuples so that order names are associated with sets of taxa.

* [**tuple.py**](code/tuple.py)
  * Using list comprehension on a tuple of tuples to print information about bird species.

* [**align_seqs.py**](code/align_seqs.py)
  * A program which reads 2 nucleotide sequences from sequences.csv in the data directory and iterates through the possible alignments to calculate the alignments with the highest number of matching bases. The last alignment with the highest matching score is then printed and saved to a text file, sequence_alignment.txt, in the results directory.

* [**oaks_debugme.py**](code/oaks_debugme.py)
  * A script that reads the csv file, TestOaksData.csv, from the data directory and determines whether the tree species are oaks or not. Oak species are then written to a new csv, JustOaksData.csv, in the data directory.

## Author

Tash Ramsden | tash.ramsden21@imperial.ac.uk
